In this lesson, we are going to continue
our introduction to the for-loop by taking
a look at how to use a for-loop to process
the characters in a string.
The string is a sequence of data, just
like a list or any other
data structure is, and we can use
the for-loop to perform computations on
strings.
So we'll look at some simple examples in
this lesson.
To start our program, we're gonna call it
4intro2.py.
So the first thing we are gonna do is
create a simple word, hello,
and then we're gonna write a for-loop to
access each letter of that word.
So we're gonna say for letter in word,
print letter.
And what that will do is that will print h
e l l o in a separate line.
So let's save the program and exit and
then run it,
and there's h e l l o, each on it's own
line.
So now let's look at a more complex
example.
Let's go back to the program.
Will comment out these first couple of
lines, we don't need 'em anymore.
And what I wanna do now is I want to count
the number of vowels in a longer string in
a sentence.
So our sentence says, now is the time for
all good people to come to the aid.
Let's count the vowels real quick, one,
two, three,
four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten,
11,
12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.
So there are 19 vowels.
To keep track of the vowels, we need a
variable to store each occurrence.
So we'll use count and we'll sign it zero.
So here we'll have our for-loop, four
letter
end sentence, and then we have an if
statement.
If letter equals A, or letter equals E, or
letter equals I, or letter equals O.
Now here we have a little bit of a
dilemma.
We're running out of room on the screen to
display this line.
I don't wanna carry it off to the end of
the line, but if I drop down
to a new line, Python's gonna give me an
error saying, I didn't really finish off
this line.
So what I can do is, I can continue the
current line on the next line by topping a
backslash like that, and that backslash
tells the Python interpreter
to continue as if it was on the same line.
I'm gonna come down here and indent a
little bit more and say, or
letter equals U, followed by a colon
because that's the end of my if.
And in the body of the if, is simply gonna
say count is equal to count plus one.
In other words, if a letter is A, or a
letter is E, or a letter is I, or a letter
is O, or a letter is U, then the letter is
a value, and we want to add one to the
count.
So then when we're finished we can say
print the number of vowels is,
plus string count, like so.
So let's exit, and save, clear the screen,
and then
run our program, and it says the number of
vowels is 19.
So it worked.
So again, we can use a for-loop anytime we
want to process the elements of
a sequence, especially when we want to
process all of the elements in a sequence.
That's not to say that we can't use break
or even continue to modify the flow of
control,
but in general, for-loops are used when we
want
to access all of the elements in the
sequence.
And in fact anytime we're working with
sequences
in general, we'll use for-loops over while
loops.
While loops I like to call open ended
Now I like to call for-loops close ended
because with the for-loop we
can usually see just by scanning the
program, the range of the loop.
How many elements is it going to access,
and what's the possibility.
When we know that in this particular
program, it's not going to access more
than the last letter in the sentence, and
we can see that easy enough.
Whereas if we're processing a file with a
while loop, we
may not know cuz we can't see the end of
the file.
Or if we're doing some other open-ended
problem, again we
can't really look and know when the loop's
going to end.
But with a for-loop, we can usually tell
what the range of computation's going to
be.
So, that wraps up this second introduction
to the
for-loop and now we're gonna move into
some more specific
examples of using for-loops with sequences
by examining in
more detail how to use the for-loop with a
list.